Add the Mobile App Deployment Guide (#3331)
mattermost/docs: source/deployment/mobile-app-deployment.rst

################
About this Guide
################

********
Audience
********

Leaders, Administrators, and/or Champions

    **Note:** Some features described in this guide are only available to E10 and/or E20 (Enterprise Edition).

*******************
Learning Objectives
*******************

This guide provides foundational information necessary when developing a plan for a proof of concept and/or enterprise mobile deployment. 

It will not include technical implementation guidance. Links to relevant documentation are included however.

By the end of this guide you should have an understanding of the high-level requirements for a successful Mattermost mobile deployment. 

> Including but not limited to:

Reviewer: This includes:

> Including but not limited to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes:
```

- Choosing how to obtain and distribute the Mattermost mobile applications
- Determining the ideal mobile deployment model for your organization
- Understanding the resource requirements when choosing to build your own Mattermost mobile apps

*******
Support
*******

If at any point you need additional help, we’re ready to assist, just reach out using the methods below.

**Community**

>     Our entire team is active within our `public instance of Mattermost <https://community.mattermost.com>`_, plus you’ll have the support of one of the best open source communities around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Our entire team is active within the `public instance of Mattermost <https://community.mattermost.com>`_, plus you’ll have the support of one of the best open source communities around.
```

**Documentation**

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.
```

Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages.

Of course, large enterprise deployments will take more time, and the overall goals for your deployment will depend on many factors.

We recommend taking a moment to write down what a successful deployment looks like. To start, ask yourself and your team what you want to achieve.

Put another way, what are your desired outcomes?

This takes a small amount of time up front. But, we’ve seen the difference this makes in successful projects. 

Below, we’ve added some key questions to ask yourself, your team, and any other stakeholders.

- Why have we decided to deploy the Mattermost mobile application?
- Who will, or should, play a key/critical role in this project?
- Who does this project impact?
- How much time do we have for this deployment?
- Should, or could, an initial deployment take a simpler path?
- Can we stagger our deployment, starting with simple requirements first?
- Are you going to run a pilot deployment, if so, with whom?
- What IT or HR policies need to change?

We recommend setting at least one, achievable and time-based outcome.

> At the same time, you should begin thinking about technical and security requirements. A great place to start is with an implementation plan. So, feel free to `use our template available <https://docs.mattermost.com/getting-started/implementation_plan.html>`_ in the Mattermost documentation. Also, begin by engaging with your technical and security questions like those below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, you should begin thinking about technical and security requirements. A great place to start is with an implementation plan. So, feel free to `use our template available <https://docs.mattermost.com/getting-started/implementation_plan.html>`_ in the Mattermost documentation. Also, begin by engaging with your technical and security teams with questions like those below.
```

- Are there any known security or access requirements?
- Is a VPN connection required?
- Do we use an Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Provider?

Again, this means pausing before you jump into your Mattermost mobile deployment. This takes a little more time, but will make the difference in ensuring your see a return on your investment.

----

###################################
Mattermost Mobile Deployment Primer
###################################

A mobile deployment is not a small project. While Mattermost provides options to make it as easy as possible, it will take time and iteration.

We’re here to support you.

This primer serves as an introduction to Mattermost mobile technologies. It is a complement to our technical documentation, and focuses on three main areas:

- Technical Requirements
- Basic Features and Technologies

> - Trouble Spots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Troubleshooting
```

Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment.

**********************
Technical Requirements
**********************

`Supported Mattermost Server Versions <https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-mobile/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_ 

>     Minimum requirements for the Mattermost Server is maintained in our documentation (link above). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Minimum requirements for the Mattermost Server are maintained in our documentation (link above). 
```

    **However, we do recommend running the latest version** of the Mattermost Server as it contains the most recent features and any applicable security updates.

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to be on at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Reviewer: @faase had asked about this and made the same suggestion. It had been from a direct CSM request, but I think I agree with you guys. @faase please add per the suggestion above, and remove the specific version reference.

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to be on at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If this is not possible, we encourage you to be on at least Extended Service Release version of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).
```

Reviewer: Should add relevant link.

`Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_
    Basic mobile device requirements are provided in the link above.

********************************

> Public App Store vs. Custom Apps

Reviewer: Yes any reference to “Custom Apps” should say Custom Mattermost Apps

> Public App Store vs. Custom Apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public App Store vs. Custom Mattermost Apps
```

********************************

The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via Google Play and Apple App Store, or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.

Public App Store
================

> Utilizing the app distributed by Mattermost in Google play and the Apple App Store greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include:

Reviewer 2: Typo - Google **P**lay - capital P

> Utilizing the app distributed by Mattermost in Google play and the Apple App Store greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include:

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the stores web page for our app? https://apps.apple.com/us/app/mattermost/id1257222717 0/5

Reviewer: Don't think this would add much value for the audiece. 0/5 if we want to point to our doc page for the mobile apps https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appstore-install.html.

> Utilizing the app distributed by Mattermost in Google play and the Apple App Store greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Utilizing the app distributed by Mattermost in Google Play and the Apple App Store greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include:
```

- Easier deployment, driven by user needs.

> - Ability to use the Mattermost Push Notification Service, or MPNS.

Reviewer 2: Elsewhere we use (MPNS) 0/5

Reviewer: HPNS is the Mattermost hosted version of our push proxy. I think MPNS is the service - whether hosted by MM or not. I believe.

Reviewer: +1

> - Ability to use the Mattermost Push Notification Service, or MPNS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ability to use the Mattermost hosted version Mattermost Push Notification Service (HPNS).
```

- Apps automatically updated with the latest features, enhancements and security updates.

Again, this is the recommended route which is as simple as downloading the Mattermost mobile application from the corresponding store, entering a URL to point towards your Mattermost server, and logging in.

> Custom Apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom Mattermost Apps
```

===========

If you desire to customize the applications, or do not want your users downloading the application from the public app stores, you will need to build the apps yourself. 

> As the apps are an open source project, it will require a fork, and your team will be responsible for maintaining the fork, as well as keeping the fork up to date with any changes made by Mattermost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the apps are an open source project, any customizations will require a fork, and your team will be responsible for maintaining the fork, as well as keeping the fork up to date with any changes made by Mattermost.
```

This process can be complicated. It will also greatly increase deployment time, not only initially, but whenever the apps need to be updated. 

We recommend having your development team take a look at the documentation to ensure they understand the scale and requirements of this path. In general, this route will present some challenges, including:

> - Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom Mattermost application
```

> - Signing your custom applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Signing your custom Mattermost application
```

- Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

*******************************************
Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS)
*******************************************

Receiving notifications on a mobile device is a core value of your mobile deployment.

It also represents a return on your deployment investment through better-connected users. 

A push proxy is a key technology behind notification transmission. It enables notifications between the server and the mobile application.

> Mattermost provides a self-hosted Push Proxy you can deploy, the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This is also available via a hosted-by-Mattermost option, or Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS)*.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what the * relates to, as there is no corresponding 'footnote' with an * as an explanation (as per the EMM providers one below).  If it is the _note_ below then I assume it is not needed?

Reviewer: +1

    **Note:** `Only Mattermost Enterprise Edition E10 <https://about.mattermost.com/pricing/>`_ or higher to receive access to our Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS)

If you will be using the Mattermost applications via Google Play and Apple App Store, the HPNS is all you need.

Our Hosted Push Notification Service offers:

> - Access to a publicly-hosted Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS).

Reviewer: +1

- An explicit `privacy policy <https://about.mattermost.com/hpns-privacy/>`_ for the contents of unencrypted messages.
- Encrypted TLS connections:
    - between HPNS and Apple Push Notification Services
    - HPNS and Google’s Firebase Cloud Messaging service
    - HPNS and your Mattermost server
- Production-level uptime expectations
- Compatibility with EMM Providers*

\* *When using our publicly-available app store applications and the AppConfig standard.*

> Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option but requires a custom built app. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option but requires you to build the mattermost app yourself. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.
```

********************************************
Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Providers
********************************************

EMM Providers develop software that helps enterprise teams manage secure mobile technology deployments. This includes the use of mobile devices and usage-ready applications.

Most large enterprise teams are familiar with `Enterprise Mobile Management <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enterprise_mobility_management>`_ providers, or EMMs. If this is a new term for you, review `Appendix B <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.pn9oiqr3rebj>`_ for a list of providers and relevant information.

For those taking on larger deployments, we assume you are already using an EMM provider.

> AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to App Wrapping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to the previous standard, App Wrapping.
```

We’ll say it several times throughout this guide, and in the next section. If you are using an EMM provider, the only supported path is via AppConfig.

While app wrapping has been widely supported, **it is not recommended**. Further, **it is not a supported path** for Mattermost mobile deployment.

AppConfig (Supported) vs. App Wrapping (Not Supported)
======================================================

> Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. If you proceed with app wrapping, it will lead to an inability to use the mobile app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. If you proceed with app wrapping, it may lead to additional deployment time, and can limit overall success of your mobile deployment. 
```

**Option 2**
    The EMM provider gives you a tool used for wrapping the app. In more modern cases, it’s a simple checkbox in your EMM application when configuring the app. These tools then inject all the needed code to wrap it. Then the tool (or EMM provider) builds it back up. This allows you to distribute the new, wrapped app. The wrapped app has a layer allowing you to manage and secure the app on a user’s mobile device. 

Until recently app wrapping has been the common approach. It does not come without risks and challenges to scalability though. 

For example, most modern applications follow continuous development. Each time an application changes it will need to go through the process described above. 

> There is also functionality and compatibility risk. This is a known issue for the Mattermost application and app wrapping tools.

Reviewer 2: Personally, I think this is where we should have the detail (that is currently later in the article) that explains the issue with React Native. This section goes into a lot of detail for something we don't support but for me misses off the key bit of explanation. The later part of the article for me should be more focused on guidance on what to do, not the detail of why we don't support it.

Reviewer: I’m 3/5 with either keeping it as is, or having it in both places for redundancy of the message.

Reviewer: Keep as is, and we'll ponder this for v2. 5/5

This incompatibility is not an issue with the Mattermost application. It results from the proprietary nature of the provider's tools. To make matters worse, there is no course of action to address compatibility issues.

> In the end, this sets app wrapping in a negative light. This is the reason VMWare and other EMM providers came together to create a standard. AppConfig is a modern, efficient, and scalable approach to enterprise mobile management. In that regard, the Mattermost application benefits from being built around this standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the end, this sets app wrapping in a negative light. This is the reason EMM providers came together to create a standard. AppConfig is a modern, efficient, and scalable approach to enterprise mobile management. In that regard, the Mattermost application benefits from being built around this standard.
```

    **Note:** We suggest `following our recommended steps <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appstore-install.html>`_ to secure your deployment.

**Device VPN**
    This is not as common, especially in the case of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) scenarios. In this option, all internet traffic routes through the VPN specified in the profile. This could cause issue for personal applications. Of course even for devices provided by your business, this tends not to be the modern approach.

**Per-app VPN**
    In contrast, the more common approach is to use a per-app VPN. This provides a connection to the VPN when needed (on-demand). For example, when using a particular app.

Regardless of the commonness of either option above, Mattermost provides support for both. Because Mattermost supports the AppConfig standard, both options are compatible with EMM providers.

    **Note:** Will you be connecting via a corporate proxy server? If so, `review our FAQ <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-do-i-receive-mobile-push-notification-if-my-it-policy-requires-the-use-of-a-corporate-proxy-server>`_ covering architecture, troubleshooting, and best practices.

> ----

Reviewer 2: Something I hadn't picked up on reading this in previous drafts was that we have a whole section on Mobile App VPN, but I find in my experience that is far less commonly used than reverse proxy back to the MM server for remote mobile and webapp connections. We haven't touched on the requirements for an inbound reverse proxy, we have naturally focused more on the outbound as that has focus at present. For an inbound reverse proxy if it doesn't support websockets then the app isn't going to work. Feels a gap. Not sure if you want to include guidance now or later but it would be good to get others input on this as a subject.

Reviewer: VPN was what we provided as part of our internal training. @johnthompson365 do you think this is critical to get in? If so, could you work with Sebastian to add the section and confirm technical accuracy with the dev team? It seems like we’d just need to add another section for **Revers Proxy** and then a few sentences  to describe it at a high level.

Reviewer: Thought about this some more. To get this delivered I think this would be something we could work on and iterate delivery. Unless there is a strong feeling it can’t go out without it.

Reviewer: 5/5 To move this to a v2. we can create an item in our backlog to add content related to Reverse Proxy for this guide.

- Ensure a high level of security and controlled access
- Use existing, internal processes and tools

We recommend either of these options if you are:

- Testing out the mobile applications
- Deploying Team Edition servers using no push notifications, or push notifications from Mattermost’s `TPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/overview/faq.html#tpns>`_ (Test Push Notification Service)
- Deploying Enterprise Edition servers using push notifications from Mattermost’s `HPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ (Hosted Push Notification Service)

The mobile applications provided by Mattermost work with our hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This represents the easier path. The Mattermost mobile applications can be deployed with or without an EMM provider. These options are explained in more detail below. 

    **Note:** HPNS is compatible with EMM providers.

**Option 1** - Public App Store Installation (Easiest)

- Users download application via Apple App Store or Google Play
- Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost Server.

**Advantages:** Very easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user 

> **Disadvantages:** Less control over user security, no app customization

Reviewer: This should be changed per our conversation. I’d make a small article change “Lack of access to additional security features available with EMMs, and no mattermost app customization.”

> **Disadvantages:** Less control over user security, no app customization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Disadvantages:** Lack of access to additional security features available with EMMs
```

**Option 2** - Public App Store Installation with EMM Provider (Easy)

> - Users download application via public app stores (e.g. iOS App Store or Google Play)

Reviewer: +1 this should be clarified. Also, I believe we refer to this as Apple App Store everywhere else.

> - Users download application via public app stores (e.g. iOS App Store or Google Play)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- EMM Admin makes the applications available via the EMM app catalog, including the ability to have them pushed to the devices enrolled with the EMM
```

- Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost server
- Extend your organization’s security best practices/requirements via your EMM provider

> **Advantages:** Easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user, app security and configuration can be maintained via your EMM provider 

Reviewer: +1

> **Advantages:** Easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user, app security and configuration can be maintained via your EMM provider 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Advantages:** Easy, mobile deployment automatically to enrolled devices, app security and configuration can be maintained via your EMM provider 
```

**Disadvantages:** No app customization

*********************************************
Distributing Custom Builds of the Mobile Apps
*********************************************

**Desired Outcomes:**

- Maintain full control over the distribution of applications
- Change the look, feel, and capabilities of the Mattermost mobile application

> - Limit message traffic from passing through the HPNS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deploy your own MPNS to meet specific organizational requirements
```

> This model is more difficult, and is recommended for organizations that can't (or don't desire) to use the HPNS. Often security and access requirements determine this, not the size of your organization.

Reviewer 2: For me it is usually the org standard that commonly defines this approach, not a desire to not use HPNS. Woudl an option be ... 
_This model is more difficult but is common in organisations that have security or mobile app standards that require you to deploy mobile apps from your Enterprise App Store, or are unable to use HPNS._

Reviewer: In other review, specifically in talking with @enahum, deployment of the mobile apps from EMM catalog won’t necessarily require you to build the Mobile apps. You can push the apps to the user’s phone without exclusion from using the HPNS. The rewrite seems to imply this. I also think the current sentence covers the same message.

Reviewer: 5/5 No changes needed for now.

Both Google and Apple require signatures of the application and push proxy to match. This means if you build the applications, you must host your own instance of MPNS.

Building the apps can be an involved process. This requires that you have the skillset to maintain and deploy packaged apps. Part of this process includes, but is not limited to:

> - Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom Mattermost application
```

> - Signing your custom applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Signing your custom Mattermost application
```

- Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

> Your custom built apps are a fork of the Mattermost project. This means you will be responsible for adding in any feature or security updates.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further, in cases where you have customized the Mattermost Apps, these will be a fork of the Mattermost project. This means you will be responsible for adding in any feature or security updates to maintain parity with the Mattermost apps.  
```

`Mattermost of iOS Devices <https://apps.apple.com/us/app/mattermost/id1257222717>`_ (via Apple App Store)

If you do not desire (or require) additional security provide via an EMM Provider, your deployment is complete. Feel free to point your users to the `available documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/guides/user.html>`_.

The sub-sections below serve as a high-level guide to understanding this deployment model. When necessary, we point to the documentation for technical instruction.

    **Note:** At a minimum, we recommend you follow our recommended steps to secure your deployment.

********************************************
Using an EMM Provider with Public Store Apps
********************************************

EMM providers help extend security parameters to the Mattermost mobile applications. The AppConfig standard makes this possible. `Review the Mattermost AppConfig Values Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html#mattermost-appconfig-values>`_ for a complete list of available parameters.  

When going this route, you should consider:

- What is the mobile policy, is it company-owned or BYOD?

> - Do you know what devices will be used if customer-owned?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do you know what devices will be used if BYOD?
```

- What OS do you want to start with in testing?
- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item

**********************************
Configuring Mattermost to Use HPNS
**********************************

Configuring your Mattermost Server to use the Mattermost HPNS is a single configuration item. This is covered in our `Hosted Push Notification Service documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_. 

Next your users would need to install the mobile application on their device. If desired, you can further configure security capabilities using an EMM provider.

**********************************
Updating via the Public Store Apps
**********************************

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

For example we recommend you:

* Check the compatibility requirements
* Validate versions connecting to server
* Update server
* Update apps

```

It is often easier to upgrade the mobile apps. However, not all provided updates are compatible with all previous versions of the Mattermost server. 

    **Note:** Only updating the mobile apps, or updating the mobile apps before the Mattermost server, can result in incompatibility.

> ----

Reviewer 2: Could we re-word this to provide clearer guidance on what to do? I am not sure of the steps but if we are saying there is a risk here, are we able to provide simple guidance to mitigate it? Or is this more complex? e.g.
We recommend that you: 
Check the compatibiltiy requirements
Validate versions connecting to server
Update server
Update apps

Reviewer: +1 I think it’s reasonable to add this and links to the pages that show the compatibility and version notes.

We’ve provided some recommended sections below.

- Developer Setup
- Build Your Own App
- Push Notifications

*********************************
Distribution Through an App Store
*********************************

Once you have built your own apps you will need to distribute them. There are two options:

Option 1 - Enterprise App Store via EMM Provider (most common and recommended): 

- This is the most common way for customers to distribute their apps
- Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", user can download

Option 2 - Apple App Store & Google Play (less common):

- To submit an app to the official app stores, you need to submit the app to Apple/Google for review
- This is the same process Mattermost uses make the apps available for everyone.
- This process is more common if you are looking to white label the app to remove Mattermost branding

> - This is not the typical approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

******************************************************
Using an EMM Provider with Your Custom Mattermost Apps
******************************************************

If you will be using an EMM provider, note that Mattermost does not support App Wrapping. Instead we use the AppConfig standard.

> In some instances, there is an incompatibility with App Wrapping and React Native Applications. React Native is the technology used to develop the Mattermost mobile applications. The Mattermost mobile app will not function properly when using app wrapping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some instances, there is an incompatibility with App Wrapping and React Native Applications. React Native is the technology used to develop the Mattermost mobile applications. The Mattermost mobile app will not function properly when using app wrapping. In fact, a majority of the app wrappers EMMs provide do not support WebSocket connections.
```

Though app wrapping was common practice, the AppConfig standard is replacing this approach. App wrapping is still often an option during the EMM configuration. Again, AppConfig is the modern standard used by Mattermost. It is the only supported method for securing Mattermost mobile applications via an EMM provider.

> 

Reviewer 2: Could both paragraphs above about app wrapping go in the primer section, and then we just need emphasise the use of AppConfig here. Coudl we just add a one liner Note here to state AppWrapping is not supported.

Reviewer: For most content, no one read “top to bottom” or “front to back”. So repetition is by design. In this case, I think we can leave it. 2/5

Reviewer 3: 0/5 where this goes, but now that I read it again I think we should mention that the majority or the app wrappers provided by EMMs do not support WebSocket connections.

Reviewer: +1 Fine with adding that.

Reviewer: 5/5 reads as desired.

AppConfig options will vary by EMM Provider and the associated device. You can review the available options in our `AppConfig Values documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html#mattermost-appconfig-values>`_.

    **Note:** In Appendix B we’ve provided a list of popular EMM providers as well as example documentation where available.

As part of configuring your EMM solution, you should consider:

- What is the mobile policy, is it company-owned or BYOD?

> - Do you know what devices will be used if customer-owned?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do you know what devices will be used if BYOD?
```

- What OS do you want to start with in testing?
- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item

*****************************************

> Configuring the MPNS for Your Custom Apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuring the MPNS for Your Custom Mattermost Apps
```

*****************************************

Building and distributing the Mattermost mobile apps requires you to deploy an instance of the MPNS.

As part of the process of building the applications you will need to sign the applications. You must also obtain the appropriate certificate for both Android and iOS. If this is not done, the applications will not be able to interact with you instance of the MPNS.

Once that is complete you can proceed with deployment of your MPNS instance.

The documentation topics listed below guide installation and configuration for your MPNS.

- `Push Notification Service Installation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/push-notifications/service/>`_
- `Admin Configuration for Push Notifications <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/config-settings.html#push-notification-contents>`_
- `Additional FAQs <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#>`_

************************************
Updating Your Custom Mattermost Apps
************************************

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. We highly recommend you update your custom apps for any security or service releases. At the same time, if you have updated the apps, prior to distribution, check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. We highly recommend you update your custom Mattermost apps for any security or service releases. At the same time, if you have updated the apps, prior to distribution, check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 
```

*******************************
Data Security on Mobile Devices
*******************************

- `How is data handled on a device after an account is deleted? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-is-data-handled-on-mobile-devices-after-a-user-account-is-deactivated>`_
- `What post metadata is sent in mobile push notifications? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#what-post-metadata-is-sent-in-mobile-push-notifications>`_
- `What are my options for securing the mobile apps? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#what-are-my-options-for-securing-the-mobile-apps>`_
- `What are my options for securing push notifications? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#what-are-my-options-for-securing-push-notifications>`_

***********************
Corporate Proxy Servers
***********************

`How do I receive mobile push notification if my IT policy requires the use of a corporate proxy server? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-do-i-receive-mobile-push-notification-if-my-it-policy-requires-the-use-of-a-corporate-proxy-server>`_

> - `Deploy Mattermost in a proxy-aware configuration with a pre-proxy relay <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#deploy-mattermost-in-a-proxy-aware-configuration-with-a-pre-proxy-relay>`_

Reviewer 2: I'm working with Sebastian to try and remove this from docs, so could we not link to it here if possible?

Reviewer: +1

> - `Deploy Mattermost in a proxy-aware configuration with a pre-proxy relay <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#deploy-mattermost-in-a-proxy-aware-configuration-with-a-pre-proxy-relay>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

################
About this Guide
################

********
Audience
********

Leaders, Administrators, and/or Champions

    **Note:** Some features described in this guide are only available to E10 and/or E20 (Enterprise Edition).

*******************
Learning Objectives
*******************

This guide provides foundational information necessary when developing a plan for a proof of concept and/or enterprise mobile deployment. 

> It will not dive into the technical implementation, but will reference any relevant documentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While technical implementation guidance is not included in this guide links to relevant documentation are provided throughout.
```

Reviewer: Maybe shrink this even more. "It will not include technical implementation guidance. Links to relevant documentation are included however." Could add that to the previous sentence.

Reviewer 4: +1 on that.

By the end of this guide you should have an understanding of the high-level requirements for a successful Mattermost mobile deployment. 

> This includes…

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Including but not limited to:
```

Reviewer: What's the impetus behind this change? Grammatically a colon = period.

Reviewer: I had to look it up (yay learning). I think the best recommendation here is, "This includes,". The ellipsis, while informal, isn't accurate punctuation here since it should mostly be isolated to omission (not the case). Again, colon doesn't work because it needs to be an independent clause (complete sentence). Finally, "but not limited to" is overly descriptive (I need to catch this in my own writing) in line with "legalese".

Reviewer 4: Grammatically, the ellipsis indicates a trailing or incomplete thought while one function of the colon is to introduce a list. If there was no bullet-point list then we could do away with the colon and have something like "...successful Mattermost deployment including cars, bicycles, and horses". 

I agree on the "Including but not limited to" being an awkward inclusion in a more casual document though. I tend to use it in technical docs to cover potentially new cases of a feature/application that may require more elaboration that isn't appropriate in that particular instance.

Reviewer: Per comment below in the other items, we should have a conversation outside of comments. To get this to done, I’m fine with the change.

- Choosing how to obtain and distribute the Mattermost mobile applications
- Determining the ideal mobile deployment model for your organization
- Understanding the resource requirements when choosing to build your own Mattermost mobile apps

*******
Support
*******

> If at any point you need additional help, we’re ready to assist, just reach out using the methods below…

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If at any point you need additional help, we’re ready to assist, just reach out using the methods below. 
```

Reviewer: This is ok (grammatically correct)... though stylistically the ellipsis matches the rest of the guide. 0 to 5.

Reviewer 4: The general consensus across the editorial guides is that we follow the Chicago Manual of Style which lends a uniformity to the documentation readability. I recommend maintaining that across all our content primarily because it makes us look consistent.  

I completely understand the prevailing style in this document but I believe the more casual writing style sets it apart enough that it fits the audience without needing unique stylistic characteristics. 

5/5 on this. 

As a side note I realize this is a contentious issue because it means there's an insistence on "style guide policing" but I'm open to a deeper discussion about it.

Reviewer: To get this guide to done I’m fine with this change. However, a deeper conversation outside of the GH comments is a  wise next course of action. In the mean time can you point me to the chicago manual of style reference and/or guidance for colons?

**Community**

>     Our entire team is active within our `public instance of Mattermost <https://community.mattermost.com/signup_user_complete>`_, plus you’ll have the support of one of the best open source communities around.

Reviewer: Totally agree @enahum. I think this was just a typo or an artifact of just being on board a couple weeks at the time of writing.

**Documentation**

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Reviewer: @enahum - Agree. At this time that’s an artifact of the docs, but I don’t think we’d preempt this since that is the existing experience. An ongoing project is working to improve the docs. @faase it is probably worth creating a task in the backlog to review and make any necessary updates.

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Author: @enahum so nothing has to be done in this PR about it?

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Author: perfect, let's just have a separate issue for it and keep this PR to this doc.

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Author: @enahum can you provide me with some of the outdated material, so i can create a separate issue for it? tried finding some myself but was unsuccessful.

>     We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage  you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.

Author: solved in meeting

**Forums**

>     For more troubleshooting help, `open a new topic in our forums <https://forum.mattermost.org/c/trouble-shoot>`_ with steps to reproduce your issue. 

Reviewer: Sounds good to me.

**Enterprise Support**
    If you’re an Enterprise Edition subscriber, you may open a support ticket in the `Enterprise Edition Support portal <https://mattermost.com/support/>`_.

----

################################
Before You Begin Your Deployment
################################

A successful mobile deployment is an important part of your experience with Mattermost.

> For leaders, champions, and administrators there is a small window for success. As with any new project, a variety of risks can limit the success of adoption. This translates to wasted time, unnecessary cost, and unhappy teams. Any change, even beneficial, will have an impact on your users. 

Reviewer: Agree. We can strike that first sentence.

> For leaders, champions, and administrators there is a small window for success. As with any new project, a variety of risks can limit the success of adoption. This translates to wasted time, unnecessary cost, and unhappy teams. Any change, even beneficial, will have an impact on your users. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As with any new project, a variety of risks can limit the success of adoption. This translates to wasted time, unnecessary cost, and unhappy teams. Any change, even beneficial, will have an impact on your users. 
```

Reviewer: +1

Author: see above (already mentioned and will be solved)

For this reason, our highest priority is making sure you have what you need to be successful. That starts with helping you identify the outcomes you’re looking to achieve.

Another way of looking at this is to consider the goals for your mobile deployment.

For example, do you want the simplest, fastest deployment possible?

> We have an option for that! Using the publicly available Mattermost mobile apps on the Google and Apple app stores can reduce a deployment to minutes.

Reviewer: Agree.

> We have an option for that! Using the publicly available Mattermost mobile apps on the Google and Apple app stores can reduce a deployment to minutes.

Reviewer 4: This sentence might work better as part of the previous sentence - thoughts?

> We have an option for that! Using the publicly available Mattermost mobile apps on the Google and Apple app stores can reduce a deployment to minutes.

Reviewer: I tend to like that the question is isolated. Helps the reader focus on that. 2/5

> Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages?

Reviewer: Typo.

> Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages?

Reviewer: Typo.

> Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Better yet, this model can be rolled out to thousands of users in many different countries and languages.
```

Reviewer: +1

Author: see above (already mentioned and will be solved)

Of course, large enterprise deployments will take more time, and the overall goals for your deployment will depend on many factors.

We recommend taking a moment to write down what a successful deployment looks like. To start, ask yourself and your team what you want to achieve.

Put another way, what are your desired outcomes?

This takes a small amount of time up front. But, we’ve seen the difference this makes in successful projects. 

Below, we’ve added some key questions to ask yourself, your team, and any other stakeholders.

- Why have we decided to deploy the Mattermost mobile application?
- Who will, or should, play a key/critical role in this project?
- Who does this project impact?
- How much time do we have for this deployment?
- Should, or could, an initial deployment take a simpler path?
- Can we stagger our deployment, starting with simple requirements first?

> - Are you going to  run a pilot deployment, if so who with?

Reviewer: +1

> - What  IT or HR policies that need to change?

Reviewer: +1

We recommend setting at least one, achievable and time-based outcome.

> At the same time, you should begin thinking about technical and security requirements. A great place to start is with an implementation plan. So, feel free to `use our template available <https://docs.mattermost.com/getting-started/implementation_plan.html>`_ in the Mattermost Documentation. Also, begin by engaging with your technical and security questions like those below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At the same time, you should begin thinking about technical and security requirements. A great place to start is with an implementation plan. So, feel free to `use our template available <https://docs.mattermost.com/getting-started/implementation_plan.html>`_ in the Mattermost documentation. Also, begin by engaging with your technical and security questions like those below.
```

Reviewer: +1

- Are there any known security or access requirements?
- Is a VPN connection required?
- Do we use an Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Provider?

Again, this means pausing before you jump into your Mattermost mobile deployment. This takes a little more time, but will make the difference in ensuring your see a return on your investment.

----

###################################
Mattermost Mobile Deployment Primer
###################################

A mobile deployment is not a small project. While Mattermost provides options to make it as easy as possible, it will take time and iteration.

We’re here to support you.

> This primer serves as an introduction to Mattermost Mobile technologies. It is a compliment to our technical documentation, and focuses on three main areas:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This primer serves as an introduction to Mattermost mobile technologies. It is a complement to our technical documentation, and focuses on three main areas:
```

Reviewer: +1

- Technical Requirements
- Basic Features and Technologies
- Trouble Spots

> Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Regardless of your level of expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment.
```

Reviewer: What’s the difference? If there’s a problem with that. I’d strike the introductory clause (from the comma back) and make the sentence, “We recommend...”

Reviewer 4: I agree with removing "Regardless of your expertise". To answer why I included "level": "Level" refers to a variation in expertise which I believe this sentence is trying to convey. "Expertise" on its own refers to a mastery of a field/industry etc. To expand on this: "level of expertise" is a range of experience in this specific subject while "expertise" is mastery of a specific field. 

If we're talking about readers' expertise in this subject I recommend "level". If we're talking about "whatever field within which your experience lies" then we don't need "level".

Reviewer: Can you point me to some guidance/rules not this? Both seem ambiguous.

Reviewer 4: My primary reference is Google and the different definitions. "Expertise refers to the in-depth knowledge and skill gained through training, practice and, above all, years of practice in a particular area or domain." vs. "level of expertise" which covers varying levels of said expertise.

My initial interpretation of the sentence is that we're covering role-players who range from beginner to expert so we want to refer to their levels vs. mastery. But I also see the merits of just using "expertise" and am 0/5 on my previous comment. :)

Reviewer: I'd keep as is.

***********************

> Technical  Requirements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Technical Requirements
```

Reviewer: +1

***********************

`Supported Mattermost Server Versions <https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-mobile/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_ 
    Minimum requirements for the Mattermost Server is maintained in our documentation (link above). 
    **However, we do recommend running the latest version** of the Mattermost Server as it contains the most recent features and any applicable security updates.

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to bon at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    If this is not possible, it's recommended that you install at least version 5.12 of Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).
```

Reviewer: Other than the typo what's the thought behind the change?

Reviewer 4: It's based on the stopwords hackathon project and the avoidance of phrases such as "we recommend" in favor of "it's recommended" and "best practice is to". The opposite of "encourage" is "discourage" which is negative and best-avoided. 

4/5 on this and happy to discuss further. :)

Reviewer: I disagree and have belabored this point: first person is not bad. This is not intended to be proper product documentation, but is living here for lack of a current home. We (Mattermost) are making a recommendation. Using the pronoun reduces this impact. Furthermore, this guide has taken on some close review that current documentation has not. Again, direct from the referenced documentation "... we recommend using an EMM provider that supports Managed App Configuration. Many app wrapping toolkits, for example Citrix MDX, also provide Managed App Configuration options. We recommend contacting your provider for more information on what deployment options are available." https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to bon at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Reviewer: There’s a type here too “be on”. @enahum I’m comfortable with stating 5.12 or higher. This was to establish a baseline. Any reason why a newer version would change that if nothing else in the guide changed?

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to bon at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Author: how do we proceed with the version? maybe say 'newest or lts release'?

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to bon at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Author: like above, let's have a separate issue for it and keep this PR to this doc.

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to bon at least version 5.12 of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Author: if we keep a version its 5.11 for now

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Reviewer: I think that's out of scope for this doc. How would a bug/issue be filed? We can update it, but I'm uncomfortable, even given a small change, making that to the official requirements.

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Author: @enahum so nothing has to be done in this PR about it?

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Author: like above, let's have a separate issue for it and keep this PR to this doc.

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Author: lives [here](https://github.com/mattermost/docs/issues/3336) now, solving this conversation

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Reviewer 5: @enahum This was changed via https://github.com/mattermost/docs/pull/3087 based on our [software requirement guidelines](https://docs.mattermost.com/process/software-requirements.html#mobile-apps) that we support latest and next-to-latest versions.

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Reviewer 5: I'll check that it's updated in the changelog.

> `Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_

Author: resolved in meeting

    Basic mobile device requirements are provided in the link above.

> `Network Requirements <https://>`_

Reviewer 3: ????????????

Reviewer: Delete. This was a section missing requirements

> `Network Requirements <https://>`_

Reviewer 4: This is missing a link.

Reviewer: +1

********************************

> Public App Store vs. Custom Apps

Reviewer 3: Public App Store in my mind only references the Apple App Store, maybe consider something like
```suggestion
Mattermost distributed vs. Custom Builds
```

Reviewer: “App Stores” is directly from the developer docs. We can strike “public”. But I’d like to keep consistent with that language. For reference — “You can build the app from source and distribute it within your team or company either using the App Stores, Enterprise App Stores or EMM providers, or another way of your choosing.” — https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/

Reviewer: For some additional reading "app store" is an accepted generic (ref:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Play). I get how this might cause confusion, technically it's right. I'll leave that to the group, but it would require doc changes to match.

Reviewer: This seems like a shift from the original comment, "Public App Store in my mind only references the Apple App Store, maybe consider something like."

Reviewer 3: nope, is not.. App Store references the Apple App Store, I'm just pointing out why the word `public` should not be used.

Author: solved in meeting

********************************

> The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via the public App Stores (i.e. Google Play And Apple App Store), or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via Google Play and Apple App Store, or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.
```

Reviewer: I’m ok with this change.

> The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via the public App Stores (i.e. Google Play And Apple App Store), or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via the public app stores (i.e. Google Play and Apple App Store), or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.
```

Reviewer: Again this was matching language and syntax from our current docs. Personally, I agree with lower case. If it’s wrong here though, it’s also wrong there. https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/

Reviewer 4: Do you mean the heading or the body of text? 

In our headings we use camel case but in the content we don't unless we're using the page's actual name in which case we can retain that capitalization for consistency.

Reviewer: First sentence on the page referenced. "You can build the app from source and distribute it within your team or company either using the App Stores, Enterprise App Stores or EMM providers, or another way of your choosing."

Reviewer 4: Ah, I didn't see that, thanks! Apologies for the misunderstanding. :) This comment can be disregarded then.

Author: solved above

> Public App Store

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mattermost distributed
```

Reviewer: See previous comment addressing this.

Author: solved in meeting

================

> Utilizing the public app stores greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include… 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Utilizing the app distributed by Mattermost in Google play and the Apple App Store greatly reduces the deployment time and is our recommended approach. Key benefits include… 
```

Reviewer: +1

- Easier deployment, driven by user needs.
- Ability to use the Mattermost Push Notification Service, or MPNS.
- Apps automatically updated with the latest features, enhancements and security updates.

Again, this is the recommended route which is as simple as downloading the Mattermost mobile application from the corresponding store, entering a URL to point towards your Mattermost server, and logging in.

> Custom Apps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Custom Builds
```

Reviewer: -1 This follows the language in the docs: “Follow these steps to receive push notifications in your custom app.“ https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/

Reviewer: I just don't feel the time involved in making these changes really adds a bunch of value. There's no evidence anyone is confused, and at the very least this is the internal and existing language.

Author: solved in meeting

===========

> If you desire to customize the applications, or do not want your users downloading the application from the public app stores, you will need to build the apps yourself. 

Reviewer 3: public stores is not a thing

Reviewer: See previous comments.

Author: solved in meeting

> If you desire to customize the applications, or do not want your users downloading the application from the public app stores, you will need to build the apps yourself. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you want to customize the applications, or do not want your users downloading the application from the public app stores, you will need to build the apps yourself. 
```

Reviewer: -1 

Desire was an intentional word choice here. It's a first level synonym with want, and  it helps reduce repetition (want follow in the second clause). I feel this edit is unnecessary.

Reviewer 4: I'm happy to disregard it. :)

> As the apps are an open source project, it will require a fork, and your team will be responsible for maintaining the fork, as well as keeping the fork up to date with any changes made by Mattermost.

Reviewer 3: They do not really need a fork, special care with this. I can just get the source code and build it without the need to fork the repo.

Reviewer: Agree with the distinction. This came out in several notes, but I don’t see any documentation that aligns with that particular usage.

Reviewer: "To customize the mobile apps, you can fork the open source repository and compile your own versions of the Mattermost mobile applications and Mattermost push proxy server."  https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html#build-the-apps-yourself

Reviewer: My knowledge is lacking here. For my own education, what scenario is addressed by building the apps without any changes? When would a customer want to do that?

Reviewer 3: When they  want to deploy their own MPNS for compliance reasons

Reviewer: Right. I think we address that in other areas. For this section the focus is guiding a path that is related to a customer version of the mobile apps. Given the audience, and what is being conveyed, this should stay as is.

Author: solved in meeting

This process can be complicated. It will also greatly increase deployment time, not only initially, but whenever the apps need to be updated. 

> We recommend having your development team take a look at the documentation to ensure they understand the scale and requirements of this path. In general, this route will present some challenges, including…

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We recommend having your development team take a look at the documentation to ensure they understand the scale and requirements of this path. In general, this route will present some challenges, including:
```

- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom application
- Signing your custom applications

> - Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

Reviewer 3: again public/private app stores is not a thing

Reviewer: When using an EMM. There is the notion of an “Enterprise of private App Store.” Maybe this concept is conflated: https://developers.google.com/android/work/play/emm-api/private-apps. Cc @enahum

Reviewer: The additional comment indicates what we are really trying to make a distinction with is "Official" (which is also public) and "Private" options which include Enterprise App Stores and an Emm App Catalog. I think getting behind a distinction like this would be important not only for this doc, and the documentation, but the overall language used internally by all staff. Does those terms meet the desired outcome?

My worry with Mattermost Distributed, is that I don't think it's clear. And to your point, on the Android side, it could potentially make someone think there is a "Mattermost App Store" somewhere.

Author: solved in meeting

*******************************************
Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS)
*******************************************

Receiving notifications on a mobile device is a core value of your mobile deployment.

It also represents a return on your deployment investment through better-connected users. 

> A push proxy is a key technology behind notification transmission.  It enables notifications between the server and the mobile application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A push proxy is a key technology behind notification transmission. It enables notifications between the server and the mobile application.
```

Reviewer: +1

> Mattermost provides a self-hosted Push Proxy you can deploy, the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This is also available via a hosted-by-mattermost option, or hosted push notification service (HPNS)*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Mattermost provides a self-hosted Push Proxy you can deploy, the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This is also available via a hosted-by-Mattermost option, or hosted push notification service (HPNS)*.
```

Reviewer: +1

>     **Note:** `Only Mattermost Enterprise Edition E10 <https://about.mattermost.com/pricing/>`_ or higher to receive access to our Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS)

Reviewer 3: Team edition can use TPNS

Reviewer: +1

Author: should this be included in a guide focused on enterprise? 

from the [docs](https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html): 'It does not offer a production-level uptime service level agreements (SLAs).' 

this does not sound like I want to promote this to a customer?

Reviewer: @faase Good point. I say leave as is, i.e. negate the earlier +1.

> If you will be using the Mattermost applications via the iOS and Android app stores, the HPNS is all you need.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you will be using the Mattermost applications via Google Play and Apple App Store, the HPNS is all you need.
```

Reviewer: +1

Our Hosted Push Notification Service offers:

- Access to a publicly-hosted Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS).
- An explicit `privacy policy <https://about.mattermost.com/hpns-privacy/>`_ for the contents of unencrypted messages.
- Encrypted TLS connections:
    - between HPNS and Apple Push Notification Services
    - HPNS and Google’s Firebase Cloud Messaging service
    - HPNS and your Mattermost server
- Production-level uptime expectations

> - Compatibility with EMM Providers*

Reviewer 3: What is this?? and how is it applicable?

Reviewer: There was a request to highlight that just because you use an EMM provider that you can’t use the hosted service. Open to having this wrong. I’d yield to @johnthompson365 or @sadohert

Reviewer: There's probably room for private/offline discussion here around observations in the field and with customer deployments. In my research it was clear there was confusion in this regard and I believe worth keeping.

> \* *When using our publicly available app store applications and the AppConfig standard.*

Reviewer 3: I  see no reason to mention this here

Reviewer: As mentioned above, this came up as a point of confusion. App Configuration allows management of the app through the EMM provider extending certainly functionality provide by the EMM that isn’t inherent to the app itself. The goal here is to make every effort to discourage wrapping via an EMM, and encourage management with AppConfig.

Author: resolved in meeting

> \* *When using our publicly available app store applications and the AppConfig standard.*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
\* *When using our publicly-available app store applications and the AppConfig standard.*
```

Reviewer: +1

> Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to mention that hosting your own MPNS requires a custom build?

Reviewer: Again, this was an effort to make a push towards a much more efficient path.

Reviewer: +1. I missunderstod. We should call this out as often as possible.

Author: Suggestion: `Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option but requires a custom built app.`

Reviewer: Per @enahum the only change I would make is to add, "..., but this will require you to build the mobile apps yourself." - or something similar.

Author: resolved in meeting

********************************************
Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Providers
********************************************

> EMM Providers develop software that helps enterprise teams manage secure mobile technology deployments. This includes the use of mobile devices and usage ready applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
EMM Providers develop software that helps enterprise teams manage secure mobile technology deployments. This includes the use of mobile devices and usage ready applications.
```

Reviewer: +1

Most large enterprise teams are familiar with `Enterprise Mobile Management <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enterprise_mobility_management>`_ providers, or EMMs. If this is a new term for you, review `Appendix B <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.pn9oiqr3rebj>`_ for a list of providers and relevant information.

> For those taking on larger deployments, we assume you are already using an EMM Provider.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For those taking on larger deployments, we assume you are already using an EMM provider.
```

Reviewer: +1

> The AppConfig standard is the critical element when deploying Mattermost via an EMM.

Reviewer 3: how is `AppConfig` critical here?

Reviewer: See comments above.

Reviewer: +1. I think this is a good call to remove. It's overstatement. I think there was some overzealousness with pushing that AppConfig works with the EMM provider and is the happy path for extended security management of the app.

AppConfig is newer, more modern approach when compared to App Wrapping.

We’ll say it several times throughout this guide, and in the next section. If you are using an EMM provider, the only supported path is via AppConfig.

> While “App Wrapping” has been widely supported, **it is not recommended**. Further, **it is not a supported path** for Mattermost mobile deployment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While App Wrapping has been widely supported, **it is not recommended**. Further, **it is not a supported path** for Mattermost mobile deployment.
```

Reviewer: App wrapping should also be lowercase. May need to find/replace.

Reviewer: +1

AppConfig (Supported) vs. App Wrapping (Not Supported)
======================================================

> Mattermost only supports the AppConfig standard. It does not support app wrapping. If you proceed with app wrapping, it will lead to an inability to use the mobile app.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say  `inability to use the mobile app.` but something along the lines of `at your own risk of success`

Reviewer: For this audience and the goal of this doc (this is not intended to exist within the documentation for long), we took an approach to be use language to discourage this path. I stick by that, unless there are strong opinions against it.

Reviewer: First, and very important, there is no lie here, attempted or implicit. I don't think think it's reasonable to suggest that anyone has made even an attempt. This particular section was written and then rewritten to reflect what was being seen in the field. Original wording used "may" and feedback was that this didn't clearly state the risk involved. In these scenarios customers/users can waste many hours going down this path, only to fail. There are countless examples, including the section preceding this one where we explain why. We can make a change back, but should note that is in conflict with what is being encountered in the field, and a revert from previously approved wording.

Author: resolved in meeting

> So App Wrapping isn’t supported, and the AppConfig standard is, but what is the difference between the two?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
So app wrapping isn’t supported, and the AppConfig standard is, but what is the difference between the two?
```

Reviewer: +1

AppConfig
---------

“A community focused on providing tools and best practices around native capabilities in mobile operating systems to enable a more consistent, open and simple way to configure and secure mobile apps in order to increase mobile adoption in business.” - AppConfig.org

So that sounds great, but are there any benefits for users?

Again, in the AppConfig Community’s words, “Users benefit with instant mobile productivity and a seamless out-of-the box experience, and businesses benefit with secure work-ready apps with minimal setup required while leveraging existing investments in Enterprise Mobility Management (EMM), VPN, and identity solutions. Put another way, your apps are simpler to configure, secure and deploy.”

For now, focus on that last part, “... your apps are simpler to configure, secure and deploy.” AppConfig provides the most efficient and scalable path for success. As an admin this means easier deployment and management of mobile applications. And again, when it comes to Mattermost, it’s our only supported approach.

> Application (App) Wrapping

Reviewer 3: Also known as `App Containerization`

Reviewer: I’m not against that terminology, but it did not come up in any interviews/conversation, and our own documentation uses “App Wrapping”. Aligning for the sake of consistency is best. “ App wrapping via an EMM provider is untested, and not supported by Mattermost. Instead, we recommend using an EMM provider that supports Managed App Configuration.” https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html

--------------------------

> From the article we `referenced earlier <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_, application(app) wrapping involves “...the use of an SDK from an app or EMM vendor that allows a developer or admin to deploy an API that enables management policies to be set up.” 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the article we `referenced earlier <https://www.computerworld.com/article/3209907/app-wrapping-the-key-to-more-secure-mobile-app-management.html>`_, application(app) wrapping involves “...the use of an SDK from an EMM vendor that allows a developer or admin to deploy an API that enables management policies to be set up.” 
```

Reviewer: +1

When going this route, there are two options:

**Option 1**
    The EMM provider gives you their libraries, and then you go to the source code for the app. Using the libraries you "wrap" the source and repackage the application. This approach will take significant development time and associated frustration. In the end you should have an app that is now wrapped with the EMM libraries. The hope, but not the guarantee, is that you have an app with an additional layer. This allows you to manage and secure the app on a user’s mobile device.

**Option 2**

>     The EMM provider gives you a tool used for wrapping the app. In more modern cases, it’s a simple checkbox in your EMM application when configuring the app. These tools then inject all the needed code to wrap it. Then the tool (or EMM Provider) builds it back up. This allows you to distribute the new, wrapped app. The wrapped app has a layer allowing you to manage and secure the app on a user’s mobile device. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The EMM provider gives you a tool used for wrapping the app. In more modern cases, it’s a simple checkbox in your EMM application when configuring the app. These tools then inject all the needed code to wrap it. Then the tool (or EMM provider) builds it back up. This allows you to distribute the new, wrapped app. The wrapped app has a layer allowing you to manage and secure the app on a user’s mobile device. 
```

Reviewer: +1

Until recently app wrapping has been the common approach. It does not come without risks and challenges to scalability though. 

For example, most modern applications follow continuous development. Each time an application changes it will need to go through the process described above. 

There is also functionality and compatibility risk. This is a known issue for the Mattermost application and app wrapping tools.

This incompatibility is not an issue with the Mattermost application. It results from the proprietary nature of the provider's tools. To make matters worse, there is no course of action to address compatibility issues.

> In the end, this sets app wrapping in a negative light. This is the reason VMWare and other EMM providers came together to create a standard. AppConfig is a modern, efficient, and scalable approach to enterprise mobile management. In that regard, the Mattermost application benefits from being built around this standard.

Reviewer 3: Why the special mention to VMWare ?

Reviewer: Unintentional. Probably just an artifact of writing. We can add names from the list at appconfig.org or remove this reference. 0/5

Reviewer: +1. The day of writing I think the site was down and I never went back to add it.

Author: Suggestion: `This is the reason the [AppConfig Community](https://www.appconfig.org) came together to create a standard.`

Reviewer: +1

******************
Mobile VPN Options
******************

A VPN allows a device outside a firewall to access content inside the firewall as if it were on the same network. Most enterprise teams are familiar with VPNs (Virtual Private Networks). We won't go into detail here.

There are VPN options which depend on the requirements of your organization. You should also consider the demands/needs of your user. Regardless, this can impact your approach to mobile deployment.

> For the Mattermost mobile application, we’ll discuss  two options, a Device VPN or Per-app VPN.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the Mattermost mobile application, we’ll discuss two options: a device VPN or per-app VPN.
```

Reviewer: +1

    **Note:** We suggest `following our recommended steps <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appstore-install.html>`_ to secure your deployment.

**Device VPN**
    This is not as common, especially in the case of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) scenarios. In this option, all internet traffic routes through the VPN specified in the profile. This could cause issue for personal applications. Of course even for devices provided by your business, this tends not to be the modern approach.

**Per-app VPN**
    In contrast, the more common approach is to use a per-app VPN. This provides a connection to the VPN when needed (on-demand). For example, when using a particular app.

Regardless of the commonness of either option above, Mattermost provides support for both. Because Mattermost supports the AppConfig standard, both options are compatible with EMM providers.

>     **Note:** Will you be connecting via a corporate proxy server? If so, `review our FAQ <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-do-i-receive-mobile-push-notification-if-my-it-policy-requires-the-use-of-a-corporate-proxy-server>`_ covering architecture, troubleshooting and best practices.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    **Note:** Will you be connecting via a corporate proxy server? If so, `review our FAQ <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-do-i-receive-mobile-push-notification-if-my-it-policy-requires-the-use-of-a-corporate-proxy-server>`_ covering architecture, troubleshooting, and best practices.
```

Reviewer: +1 - I'm most disappointed I missed this.

----

##########################################
Choosing the Right Mobile Deployment Model
##########################################

At this point you should have read through the deployment primer. It provides a large amount of context for the principles and best practices that follow. This next section aims to help you choose one of two recommended deployment models.

*****************************************

> Using the Public App Stores (Recommended)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mattermost distributed (Recommended)
```

Reviewer: See previous comments around this for consistency.

Author: resolved in meeting

*****************************************

**Desired Outcomes:**

> - Quick rollout of the Mattermost mobile application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Quick rollout of the Mattermost mobile application
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Allow users to install the application on their device.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Allow users to install the application on their device
```

> - Allow users to install the application on their device.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Allow users to install the application on their device
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Ensure a high level of security and controlled access.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Ensure a high level of security and controlled access
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Use existing, internal processes and tools.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Use existing, internal processes and tools
```

Reviewer: +1

> We recommend either of these options if you are…

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We recommend either of these options if you are:
```

Reviewer: +1

- Testing out the mobile applications
- Deploying Team Edition servers using no push notifications, or push notifications from Mattermost’s `TPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/overview/faq.html#tpns>`_ (Test Push Notification Service)
- Deploying Enterprise Edition servers using push notifications from Mattermost’s `HPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ (Hosted Push Notification Service)

The mobile applications provided by Mattermost work with our hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This represents the easier path. The Mattermost mobile applications can be deployed with or without an EMM provider. These options are explained in more detail below. 

>     **Note:** HPNS is compatible with EMM providers.

Reviewer 3: how is this relevant?

Reviewer: Feedback from SA, CSM, and others we that confusion existed that pushed customers to use App Wrapping because of confusion where the HPNS was not compatible with EMMs. If I’m wrong on that. Happy to remove it. CC @johnthompson365 @sadohert

Reviewer: +1 for leaving. This isn't necessarily a case that docs confused them, but they make assumptions or have an existing experience. So this is a case where this document will likely be in front of customers before they dive into the documentation.

> **Option 1** - Public App Store Installation (Easiest)

Reviewer 3: Again, lets get rid of `Public App Store`

Reviewer: I’m all for this, but this is the exact language from our docs: “Mattermost mobile apps can be configured in your EMM solution using AppConfig with the apps on the *public app stores* (Google Play and Apple App Store), or as an “in-house app” you compile yourself.” https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html 

Given this we stick with consistency (per other comments) and if an overall edit is needed we create and item and do that.

Reviewer: This isn't repeating the mistake. I believe there should be a larger conversation around how we as an organization use these terms. Simply changing them here not only makes them inconsistent with the existing docs, but also how we talk about it internally.

Author: resolved in meeting

> - Users download application via public app stores (e.g. iOS App Store or Google Play)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Users download application via Apple App Store or Google Play
```

Reviewer: I prefer changes like this. I simple pulled the doc language.

- Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost Server.

**Advantages:** Very easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user 

> **Disadvantages:** Less control over user security, no app customization

Reviewer 3: Less control over user security? how? what are we saying here?

Reviewer: This method puts forward no EMM provider, simply letting a user install the app. In our conversations (though perhaps I confused things). So in a case where someone wants to require a pin code, they’d need to use an EMM provider and the appropriate AppConfig settings. Is this not the case?

The documentation seems to be written in a very similar way. For example, “ As part of AppConfig, EMM administrators can set the following additional configuration options for the Mattermost mobile apps...” I’d assume the listed options aren’t otherwise available.

Reviewer: "To meet other security and compliance policies, you can deploy the Mattermost apps with any EMM provider that supports AppConfig"

Reviewer: If you use an EMM provider, you will have additional security controls though correct? This was called out in several interviews, that if someone is looking to extend certain security controls, like those mentioned above, this is possible. I believe it's a stretch to think any of our customers/users would believe we're trying to state we provide and insecure app.

Author: resolved in meeting

> **Option 2** - Public App Store Installation with EMM Provider (Easy)

Reviewer 3: again public app store :S

Reviewer: See previous comments.

Author: resolved in meeting

> - Users download application via public app stores (e.g. iOS App Store or Google Play)

Reviewer 3: not true, user downloads the app from the EMM catalog. in the event users download the apps from google play or apple app store, the app can become managed by the EMM

Reviewer: I’m totally open to being wrong, but our documentation seems to convey exactly this. “ Mattermost mobile apps can be configured in your EMM solution using AppConfig with the apps on the public app stores (Google Play and Apple App Store), or as an “in-house app” you compile yourself. https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html#other-appconfig-settings

I can see where there may be some semantics around how the apps were obtained. However, (totally open to I misunderstood) when speaking with @johnthompson365 and others we wanted to put this forward as an option. Is this a case of it’s not possible? I think we’d want to be very clear in the docs as well if this is not the case.

Reviewer: This section describes the option with the following use case:
1. Using the mobile apps distributed by Mattermost via Google Play and the Apple App Store.
2. Using the HPNS
3. Desire to use an EMM provider to further control security parameters via an EMM.

In your first item, if they make the apps available via the EMM catalog, they would have to rebuild them correct? Or is there a way to somehow by pass the Google and Apple stores and point towards the EMM catalog. That seems impossible, but maybe I missed that somehow?

Author: resolved in meeting

> - Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost Server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost server
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Extend your organization’s security best practices/requirements via your EMM provider.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Extend your organization’s security best practices/requirements via your EMM provider
```

Reviewer: +1

**Advantages:** Easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user, app security and configuration can be maintained via your EMM provider 
**Disadvantages:** No app customization

***********************************************

> Distributing Custom Versions of the Mobile Apps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Distributing Custom Builds of the Mobile Apps
```

Reviewer: +1

***********************************************

**Desired Outcomes:**

- Maintain full control over the distribution of applications

> - Change the look, feel, and capabilities of the Mattermost mobile application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Change the look, feel, and capabilities of the Mattermost mobile application
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Limit message traffic from passing through the HPNS

Reviewer 3: I would say something along the lines of `Use your own MPNS`, limit message traffic sounds that they can somewhat control what gets sent through HPNS which is totally false.

Reviewer: Agree. The current phrase is incorrect open for misinterpretation.

Reviewer: +1

This model is more difficult, and is recommended for organizations that can't (or don't desire) to use the HPNS. Often security and access requirements determine this, not the size of your organization.

Both Google and Apple require signatures of the application and push proxy to match. This means if you build the applications, you must host your own instance of MPNS.

> Building the apps can be an involved process. This requires that you have the skillset to maintain and deploy packaged apps. Part of this process includes, but is not limited to :

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Building the apps can be an involved process. This requires that you have the skillset to maintain and deploy packaged apps. Part of this process includes, but is not limited to:
```

Reviewer: +1

- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom application
- Signing your custom applications

> - Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

Reviewer 3: again no such thing as public/private stores

Reviewer: http://mi.extendedhelp.mobileiron.com/45/all/en/desktop/App_Catalog.htm I think this may be completed with the enterprise App Store offerings from an EMM provider. Does that still ring as incorrect? If I understand correctly there is the ability to provide app via Google Play or the App Store. There are also ways to provide Private Apps at least on the Google Play Store, but there is also a function of the EMM to allow apps to be consumed and distributed with a private/enterprise store.  Maybe we need to clarify these terms. There does seem to be evidence to establish a language around the different distribution options.

Some relevant links...

http://mi.extendedhelp.mobileiron.com/45/all/en/desktop/App_Catalog.htm
https://developer.apple.com/business/distribute/
https://ibuildapp.com/mobile-enterprise-app-store/

Author: resolved in meeting

> Your custom built apps are a fork of the Mattermost project. This means you will be responsible for adding in any feature or security updates.  

Reviewer 3: not necessarily a fork as explain in the other comment

Reviewer: +1

Author: Suggestion: `Keeping your custom built apps up to date with features and security updates will be your responsibility.`

To understand what’s involved, have your development team `read through our documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/>`_.

    **Note:** As of Mattermost 5.18, E20 customers can limit data sent to the HPNS. With this option a message containing only an ID. Once the mobile client receives this ID, the message contents are loaded from the server. Thus, the message contents are never transmitted through APNS/FCM.

----

#####################################################

> Mobile Deployment via Public App Stores (Recommended)

Reviewer 3: :pain:

Reviewer: Agree. It’s mutual for arguments sake. There is a similar experience for a customer that simply follows the language in the existing docs.

Author: resolved in meeting

#####################################################

> To proceed you must have a Mattermost Server installed and accessible. This is also true for  using the hosted version of the Mattermost push proxy (HPNS).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To proceed you must have a Mattermost Server installed and accessible. This is also true for using the hosted version of the Mattermost push proxy (HPNS).
```

Reviewer: +1

*********************************
Accessing the Mobile Applications
*********************************

The Mattermost mobile application is available for both Android and iOS devices. At this point, it’s as simple as having your users download the application and `point to your Mattermost Server URL <https://docs.mattermost.com/help/getting-started/signing-in.html#ios-setup>`_.

>     **Note:** The Mattermost Mobile apps are signed and have certificates associated with Mattermost and the public app stores. This means they will not work if you are privately hosting the Mattermost Push Proxy Service.

Reviewer 3: public apps stores mentioned again....

Reviewer: The beatings will continue... until morale improves.

Author: resolved in meeting

>     **Note:** The Mattermost Mobile apps are signed and have certificates associated with Mattermost and the public app stores. This means they will not work if you are privately hosting the Mattermost Push Proxy Service.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    **Note:** The Mattermost mobile apps are signed and have certificates associated with Mattermost and the public app stores. This means they will not work if you are privately hosting the Mattermost Push Proxy Service.
```

Reviewer: +1

`Mattermost for Android Devices <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mattermost.rn&hl=en_US>`_ (via Google Play)
`Mattermost of iOS Devices <https://apps.apple.com/us/app/mattermost/id1257222717>`_ (via Apple App Store)

If you do not desire (or require) additional security provide via an EMM Provider, your deployment is complete. Feel free to point your users to the `available documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/guides/user.html>`_.

The sub-sections below serve as a high-level guide to understanding this deployment model. When necessary, we point to the documentation for technical instruction.

    **Note:** At a minimum, we recommend you follow our recommended steps to secure your deployment.

********************************************

> Using an EMM Provider with Public Store Apps

Reviewer 3: :more_pain:

Reviewer: I think it too 40 of these for me to reach out to @enahum. But hey... we’ll figure it out. This is why we review.

Author: resolved in meeting

********************************************

EMM providers help extend security parameters to the Mattermost mobile applications. The AppConfig standard makes this possible. `Review the Mattermost AppConfig Values Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html#mattermost-appconfig-values>`_ for a complete list of available parameters.  

When going this route, you should consider…

- What is the mobile policy, is it company-owned or BYOD?

> - Do you know what devices will be used if customer-owned?

Reviewer 3: customer-owned? what are we trying to say here?

Reviewer: BYOD vs. Company-distributed.

Reviewer: +1 understand the question better now. Replace we can replace customer-owned with BYOD. Need to rewrite the sentence to make it rad correctly.

Author: solved in meeting

Reviewer: +1

- What OS do you want to start with in testing?

> - Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item
```

Reviewer: +1

**********************************
Configuring Mattermost to Use HPNS
**********************************

Configuring your Mattermost Server to use the Mattermost HPNS is a single configuration item. This is covered in our `Hosted Push Notification Service documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_. 

Next your users would need to install the mobile application on their device. If desired, you can further configure security capabilities using an EMM provider.

**********************************

> Updating via the Public Store Apps

Reviewer 3: :extreme_pain_at_this_point:

Reviewer: +100

Author: resolved in meeting

**********************************

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer 3: add a link to the changelog

Reviewer: +1

> While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 
```

Reviewer: +1

It is often easier to upgrade the mobile apps. However, not all provided updates are compatible with all previous versions of the Mattermost server. 

    **Note:** Only updating the mobile apps, or updating the mobile apps before the Mattermost server, can result in incompatibility.

----

########################################

> Mobile Deployment via Custom Mobile Apps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mobile Deployment via Custom Builds
```

Reviewer: +1

########################################

> Choosing this model means you’ve decided not to use the mobile applications Mattermost has made available via the public app stores. 

Reviewer 3: :i_am_dying: with the public app stores.

Reviewer: /dead

Author: resolved in meeting

This also means you will need to maintain these applications. Maintenance includes rebuilding and incorporating feature and/or security updates. Otherwise, your applications will not match the functionality of our publicly available applications, and could be incompatible with future versions of the Mattermost server.

Finally, this choice also means you cannot use the hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (HPNS).

A great first step for this deployment model involves `reviewing the documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/>`_. Your development team should run through the requirements for building the applications. This will help understand the overall impact when choosing this option. This documentation provides guidance on building, compiling, and signing. It also includes information for customizing the apps.

We’ve provided some recommended sections below.

- Developer Setup
- Build Your Own App
- Push Notifications

*********************************

> Distribution through an app store

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Distribution Through an App Store
```

Reviewer: +1 (Is cAmEl CaSe the standard for heading)?

Author: afaik it is in the docs.mm

Reviewer 4: It's in the documentation style guide but as you note the Marketing Editorial guide says otherwise. In this case I use the documentation style guide as it mirrors the in-product text.

*********************************

Once you have built your own apps you will need to distribute them. There are two options:

> Option 1 - Enterprise App Store via EMM Provider (Most Common): 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Option 1 - Enterprise App Store via EMM Provider (most common): 
```

Reviewer: +1

> - This is the most common way for customers to distribute their apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- This is the most common way for customers to distribute their apps
```

Reviewer: +1

> - Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", user can download.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", user can download
```

Reviewer: +1

> Option 2 - Apple App Store & Google Play (not recommended):

Reviewer 3: Why not recommended?

Reviewer: For the audience of this guide we intended to provide the most efficient path to mobile deployment. Given that, the recommendation followed to the more direct, efficient, or quicker path.

Reviewer 3: Ok so how is it not efficient for me as a small/medium/large company to use the available options out there and use them?

I may not have an Enterprise app store or an EMM and want to deploy the customized apps to my personal and simply publish it in the Apple App Store or Google Play under a specific name like `OurCompanyChat`. The only pain point may be going through the Apple review process that can take a couple of days or so.

In fact, if I do not already have an Enterprise app store or an EMM provider in place it may be even more painful to set it up just to deploy the mattermost app (regardless of the associated costs).

Maybe just remove the `(not recommended)`  and add to option one (most common and recommended)

Reviewer: I'm ok with this suggestion. For the sake of those scanning we should add (less common) in place of (not recommended) to option 2 as well.

> - To submit an app to the official app stores, you need to submit the app to Apple/Google for review.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- To submit an app to the official app stores, you need to submit the app to Apple/Google for review
```

Reviewer: +1

> - This is the same process Mattermost uses make the apps available for everyone.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- This is the same process Mattermost uses make the apps available for everyone
```

Reviewer: +1

> - This process is more common if you are looking to white label the app to remove Mattermost branding.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- This process is more common if you are looking to white label the app to remove Mattermost branding
```

Reviewer: +1

> - This is not the typical approach.

Reviewer 3: why not?

Reviewer: This was requested by SAs. I’ll yield to @johnthompson365 on this one. But we made a concerted effort that app customization was not what most customers (within the audience of this guide) would do. I’m ok keeping it unless there is strong opinion or I misunderstood.

> - This is not the typical approach.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- This is not the typical approach
```

Reviewer: Why remove the period?

Reviewer: +1

******************************************************
Using an EMM Provider with Your Custom Mattermost Apps
******************************************************

If you will be using an EMM provider, note that Mattermost does not support App Wrapping. Instead we use the AppConfig standard.

In some instances, there is an incompatibility with App Wrapping and React Native Applications. React Native is the technology used to develop the Mattermost mobile applications. The Mattermost mobile app will not function properly when using app wrapping.

Though app wrapping was common practice, the AppConfig standard is replacing this approach. App wrapping is still often an option during the EMM configuration. Again, AppConfig is the modern standard used by Mattermost. It is the only supported method for securing Mattermost mobile applications via an EMM provider.

AppConfig options will vary by EMM Provider and the associated device. You can review the available options in our `AppConfig Values documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-appconfig.html#mattermost-appconfig-values>`_.

>     **Note:** In Appendix B we’ve provided a list of popular EMM Providers as well as example documentation where available.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    **Note:** In Appendix B we’ve provided a list of popular EMM providers as well as example documentation where available.
```

Reviewer: +1

As part of configuring your EMM solution, you should consider…

- What is the mobile policy, is it company-owned or BYOD?
- Do you know what devices will be used if customer-owned?
- What OS do you want to start with in testing?

> - Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item
```

Reviewer: +1

*****************************************
Configuring the MPNS for Your Custom Apps
*****************************************

> Building and distributing the Mattermost mobile apps requires you to deploy a private instance of the MPNS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Building and distributing the Mattermost mobile apps requires you to deploy an instance of the MPNS.
```

does not really need to be private

Reviewer: Agree.

As part of the process of building the applications you will need to sign the applications. You must also obtain the appropriate certificate for both Android and iOS. If this is not done, the applications will not be able to interact with you instance of the MPNS.

> Once that is complete you can proceed with deployment of your private MPNS instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once that is complete you can proceed with deployment of your MPNS instance.
```

Reviewer: Agree.

> The documentation topics listed below guide installation and configuration for your Private MPNS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The documentation topics listed below guide installation and configuration for your MPNS.
```

Reviewer: Agree.

- `Push Notification Service Installation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/push-notifications/service/>`_
- `Admin Configuration for Push Notifications <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/config-settings.html#push-notification-contents>`_
- `Additional FAQs <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#>`_

************************************
Updating Your Custom Mattermost Apps
************************************

While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost Mobile applications are available. We highly recommend you update your custom apps for any security or service releases. At the same time, if you have updated the apps, prior to distribution, check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

    **Note:** Only updating the mobile apps, or updating the mobile apps before the Mattermost server, can result in incompatibility.

----

####################################
Appendix A: Troubleshooting and FAQs
####################################

> We highly recommend you checkout our `Mobile FAQ <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html>`_ and `Mobile Troubleshooting documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-troubleshoot.html>`_. The most common questions we received have been answered there. However, it’s important to call out a few common items customers run into.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We highly recommend you check out our `Mobile FAQ <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html>`_ and `Mobile Troubleshooting documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-troubleshoot.html>`_. The most common questions we've received have been answered there. However, it’s important to call out a few common items customers run into.
```

Reviewer: +1

- `What are my options for securing push notifications? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#what-are-my-options-for-securing-push-notifications>`_

***********************
Corporate Proxy Servers
***********************

`How do I receive mobile push notification if my IT policy requires the use of a corporate proxy server? <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#how-do-i-receive-mobile-push-notification-if-my-it-policy-requires-the-use-of-a-corporate-proxy-server>`_

- `Deploy Mattermost in a proxy-aware configuration with a pre-proxy relay <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#deploy-mattermost-in-a-proxy-aware-configuration-with-a-pre-proxy-relay>`_
- `Deploy Mattermost with connection restricted post-proxy relay in DMZ or a trusted cloud environment <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#deploy-mattermost-with-connection-restricted-post-proxy-relay-in-dmz-or-a-trusted-cloud-environment>`_
- `Whitelist Mattermost push notification proxy to bypass your corporate proxy server <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#whitelist-mattermost-push-notification-proxy-to-bypass-your-corporate-proxy-server>`_

> - `Run App Store versions of the Mattermost mobile apps <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-faq.html#run-app-store-versions-of-the-mattermost-mobile-apps>`_

Reviewer 3: App Store only talks about Apple

Reviewer: Again “App Store” is the generic term used within the docs. “You can build the app from source and distribute it within your team or company either using the App Stores, Enterprise App Stores or EMM providers, or another way of your choosing.” https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/

Author: resolved in meeting

----

#############################
Appendix B: EMM Provider List
#############################

> We’ve compiled a list of the most popular EMM providers and the associated Unified Endpoint Management tools they employ. In two cases (Blackberry Dynamics and MobileIron) we’ve also provide corresponding documentation developed by the Mattermost team.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We’ve compiled a list of the most popular EMM providers and the associated Unified Endpoint Management tools they employ. In two cases (Blackberry Dynamics and MobileIron) we’ve also provided corresponding documentation developed by the Mattermost team.
```

Reviewer: +1

- `BlackBerry Mattermost Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-blackberry.html>`_
- `Blackberry Documentation and Help Materials <https://docs.blackberry.com/en/endpoint-management/blackberry-uem/12_11>`_

**********
MobileIron
**********

“MobileIron Unified Endpoint Management (UEM) provides the foundation for the industry’s first mobile-centric, zero trust enterprise security framework. Unlike other UEM solutions, MobileIron UEM puts enterprise mobile security at the center of your enterprise and allows you to build upon it with enabling technologies such as `zero sign-on (ZSO) <https://www.mobileiron.com/en/products/access>`_ user and device authentication, multi-factor authentication (MFA), and `mobile threat detection (MTD) <https://www.mobileiron.com/en/products/mobile-threat-defense>`_.”

- `MobileIron Website <https://www.mobileiron.com/en/products/uem>`_
- `MobileIron Mattermost Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-mobileiron.html>`_ 
- `MobileIron Support (requires login) <https://help.mobileiron.com/s/login/?startURL=%2Fs%2F&ec=302>`_

****
Fyde
****

> “Securely access Mattermost’s messaging platform to enable productive team collaboration. Our connectionless, modern alternative to VPN helps mitigate breach risk by securing private cloud network from direct access by unmanaged devices.”

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<insert line break>
“Securely access Mattermost’s messaging platform to enable productive team collaboration. Our connectionless, modern alternative to VPN helps mitigate breach risk by securing private cloud network from direct access by unmanaged devices.”
```

Reviewer: +1

- `Fyde for Mattermost Use Case <https://www.fyde.com/use-cases/fyde-for-mattermost>`_
- `Fyde Documentation <https://fyde.github.io/docs/>`_

****************************************

> Workspace One (formally VMware AirWatch)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Workspace One (formerly VMware AirWatch)
```
I could be wrong with this change, so please confirm. :)

Reviewer: +1. Typo.

################
About this Guide
################

********
Audience
********

Leaders, Administrators, and/or Champions

>     **Note:** Some features described in this guide are only available to E10 and/or E20 (Enterprise Edition).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    **Note:** Some features described in this guide are only available in Enterprise Edition E10 and/or E20.
```

*******************
Learning Objectives
*******************

This guide provides foundational information necessary when developing a plan for a proof of concept and/or enterprise mobile deployment. 

> It will not include technical implementation guidance. Links to relevant documentation are included however.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It does not include technical implementation guidance. Links to relevant documentation are included however.
```

By the end of this guide you should have an understanding of the high-level requirements for a successful Mattermost mobile deployment. 

This includes:

- Choosing how to obtain and distribute the Mattermost mobile applications
- Determining the ideal mobile deployment model for your organization
- Understanding the resource requirements when choosing to build your own Mattermost mobile apps

*******
Support
*******

If at any point you need additional help, we’re ready to assist, just reach out using the methods below.

**Community**
    Our entire team is active within the `public instance of Mattermost <https://community.mattermost.com>`_, plus you’ll have the support of one of the best open source communities around.
**Documentation**
    We link to a lot of `mobile-specific documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-overview.html>`_ within this guide, but we encourage you to check `all of our documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/>`_.
**Forums**
    For more troubleshooting help, `open a new topic in our forums <https://forum.mattermost.org/c/trouble-shoot>`_ with steps to reproduce your issue.
**GitHub**

>     Visit us on `GitHub <https://github.com/mattermost/>`_ to create issues with any of our repositories.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Visit us on `GitHub <https://github.com/mattermost/>`_ to create issues in any of our repositories.
```

----

###################################
Mattermost Mobile Deployment Primer
###################################

A mobile deployment is not a small project. While Mattermost provides options to make it as easy as possible, it will take time and iteration.

We’re here to support you.

This primer serves as an introduction to Mattermost mobile technologies. It is a complement to our technical documentation, and focuses on three main areas:

- Technical Requirements
- Basic Features and Technologies
- Troubleshooting

Regardless of your expertise, we recommend reading this section before starting your deployment.

**********************
Technical Requirements
**********************

`Supported Mattermost Server Versions <https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-mobile/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_ 
    Minimum requirements for the Mattermost Server are maintained in our documentation (link above). 
    **However, we do recommend running the latest version** of the Mattermost Server as it contains the most recent features and any applicable security updates.

>     If this is not possible, we encourage you to be on the most recent `Extended Service Release version <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/extended-support-release.html>`_ of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    If this is not possible, we encourage you to be on the most recent `Extended Support Release version <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/extended-support-release.html>`_ of the Mattermost Server. This release has a number of critical feature updates that will ensure compatibility in a number of areas, including the Mattermost push notification service (MPNS).
```

`Supported Devices/Mobile Device Requirements <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/requirements.html#mobile-apps>`_
    Basic mobile device requirements are provided in the link above.

*******************************************
Public App Store vs. Custom Mattermost Apps
*******************************************

    **Note:** This guide uses `Public App Store` as generic for the two most used application stores `Apple App Store` and `Google Play Store`.

> The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via Google Play and Apple App Store, or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment will be whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via Google Play and Apple App Store, or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.
```
```suggestion
The most critical decision you will make in your mobile deployment is whether to use the apps provided by Mattermost via Google Play and Apple App Store, or to build and distribute custom versions of the Mattermost apps. Below we provide a very general overview of these options.
```

We recommend having your development team take a look at the documentation to ensure they understand the scale and requirements of this path. In general, this route will present some challenges, including:

- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom Mattermost application
- Signing your custom Mattermost applications
- Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

*******************************************
Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS)
*******************************************

Receiving notifications on a mobile device is a core value of your mobile deployment.

It also represents a return on your deployment investment through better-connected users. 

A push proxy is a key technology behind notification transmission. It enables notifications between the server and the mobile application.

Mattermost provides a self-hosted Push Proxy you can deploy, the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This is also available via a hosted-by-Mattermost option, or Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS).

>     **Note:** `Only Mattermost Enterprise Edition E10 <https://about.mattermost.com/pricing/>`_ or higher to receive access to our Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    **Note:** `Only Mattermost Enterprise Edition E10 <https://about.mattermost.com/pricing/>`_ or higher can be used to receive access to our Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS)
```

Or something similar

If you will be using the Mattermost applications via Google Play and Apple App Store, the HPNS is all you need.

Our Hosted Push Notification Service offers:

- Access to a publicly-hosted Hosted Push Notification Service (HPNS).
- An explicit `privacy policy <https://about.mattermost.com/hpns-privacy/>`_ for the contents of unencrypted messages.
- Encrypted TLS connections:
    - between HPNS and Apple Push Notification Services
    - HPNS and Google’s Firebase Cloud Messaging service
    - HPNS and your Mattermost server
- Production-level uptime expectations
- Compatibility with EMM Providers*

\* *When using our publicly-available app store applications and the AppConfig standard.*

> Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option but requires you to build the mattermost app yourself. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Hosting your own version of the MPNS is an option, but requires you to build the Mattermost app yourself. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.
```

> Of course, if you would like to host your own version of the MPNS, that is always an option but requires you to build the mattermost app yourself. The `Choosing the Right Deployment Model <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.6zz62c4mus3l>`_ section of this guide, as well as our `Mobile App Admin Documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ are the best places to start.

Reviewer 5: Is the Gdoc link public?

Author: this should be links to different parts of this very document. i missed to convert those and will do so asap. thanks for finding those.

********************************************
Enterprise Mobile Management (EMM) Providers
********************************************

EMM Providers develop software that helps enterprise teams manage secure mobile technology deployments. This includes the use of mobile devices and usage-ready applications.

> Most large enterprise teams are familiar with `Enterprise Mobile Management <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enterprise_mobility_management>`_ providers, or EMMs. If this is a new term for you, review `Appendix B <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BhHla4medUGVSWuBPNuoz_h5f85MdlIQWcRn5N2WUos/edit#heading=h.pn9oiqr3rebj>`_ for a list of providers and relevant information.

Reviewer 5: Is the Gdoc link public?

Author: same as above

**Option 2**
    The EMM provider gives you a tool used for wrapping the app. In more modern cases, it’s a simple checkbox in your EMM application when configuring the app. These tools then inject all the needed code to wrap it. Then the tool (or EMM provider) builds it back up. This allows you to distribute the new, wrapped app. The wrapped app has a layer allowing you to manage and secure the app on a user’s mobile device. 

Until recently app wrapping has been the common approach. It does not come without risks and challenges to scalability though. 

For example, most modern applications follow continuous development. Each time an application changes it will need to go through the process described above. 

There is also functionality and compatibility risk. This is a known issue for the Mattermost application and app wrapping tools.

This incompatibility is not an issue with the Mattermost application. It results from the proprietary nature of the provider's tools. To make matters worse, there is no course of action to address compatibility issues.

> In the end, this sets app wrapping in a negative light. This is the reason the [AppConfig Community](https://www.appconfig.org) came together to create a standard. AppConfig is a modern, efficient, and scalable approach to enterprise mobile management. In that regard, the Mattermost application benefits from being built around this standard.

Reviewer 5: Link formatting needs fixing.

**Desired Outcomes:**

- Quick rollout of the Mattermost mobile application
- Allow users to install the application on their device
- Ensure a high level of security and controlled access
- Use existing, internal processes and tools

We recommend either of these options if you are:

- Testing out the mobile applications
- Deploying Team Edition servers using no push notifications, or push notifications from Mattermost’s `TPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/overview/faq.html#tpns>`_ (Test Push Notification Service)
- Deploying Enterprise Edition servers using push notifications from Mattermost’s `HPNS <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_ (Hosted Push Notification Service)

The mobile applications provided by Mattermost work with our hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (MPNS). This represents the easier path. The Mattermost mobile applications can be deployed with or without an EMM provider. These options are explained in more detail below. 

    **Note:** HPNS is compatible with EMM providers.

**Option 1** - Public App Store Installation (Easiest)

- Users download application via Apple App Store or Google Play

> - Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost Server.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Users enter URL to your hosted Mattermost Server
```

**Advantages:** Very easy, mobile deployment can be done by each individual user 

> **Disadvantages:** No additional EMM security features

Reviewer 5: This is not rendering in a separate line (same below)

- Change the look, feel, and capabilities of the Mattermost mobile application
- Deploy your own MPNS to meet specific organizational requirements

This model is more difficult, and is recommended for organizations that can't (or don't desire) to use the HPNS. Often security and access requirements determine this, not the size of your organization.

Both Google and Apple require signatures of the application and push proxy to match. This means if you build the applications, you must host your own instance of MPNS.

Building the apps can be an involved process. This requires that you have the skillset to maintain and deploy packaged apps. Part of this process includes, but is not limited to:

- Obtaining/providing certificates for your custom Mattermost application
- Signing your custom Mattermost applications
- Distributing your applications via public or private app stores

Keeping your custom built apps up to date with features and security updates will be your responsibility.

To understand what’s involved, have your development team `read through our documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/build-your-own/>`_.

>     **Note:** As of Mattermost 5.18, E20 customers can limit data sent to the HPNS. With this option a message containing only an ID. Once the mobile client receives this ID, the message contents are loaded from the server. Thus, the message contents are never transmitted through APNS/FCM.

Reviewer 5: "With this option a message containing only an ID."

Incomplete sentence?

----

#####################################################
Mobile Deployment via Public App Stores (Recommended)
#####################################################

To proceed you must have a Mattermost Server installed and accessible. This is also true for using the hosted version of the Mattermost push proxy (HPNS).

*********************************
Accessing the Mobile Applications
*********************************

The Mattermost mobile application is available for both Android and iOS devices. At this point, it’s as simple as having your users download the application and `point to your Mattermost Server URL <https://docs.mattermost.com/help/getting-started/signing-in.html#ios-setup>`_.

    **Note:** The Mattermost mobile apps are signed and have certificates associated with Mattermost and the public app stores. This means they will not work if you are privately hosting the Mattermost Push Proxy Service.

> `Mattermost for Android Devices <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mattermost.rn&hl=en_US>`_ (via Google Play)

Reviewer 5: Is this a heading?

Author: these are just standalone links

When going this route, you should consider:

- What is the mobile policy, is it company-owned, BYOD or both?
- Do you know what devices will be used if BYOD?
- What OS do you want to start with in testing?
- Creating a sample configuration then run validation tests against each config item

**********************************
Configuring Mattermost to Use HPNS
**********************************

Configuring your Mattermost Server to use the Mattermost HPNS is a single configuration item. This is covered in our `Hosted Push Notification Service documentation <https://docs.mattermost.com/mobile/mobile-hpns.html>`_. 

Next your users would need to install the mobile application on their device. If desired, you can further configure security capabilities using an EMM provider.

**********************************
Updating via the Public Store Apps
**********************************

While not part of your initial mobile deployment, you should consider a strategy for updating when new versions of the Mattermost mobile applications are available. Simultaneously, you should check any compatibility requirements for the mobile apps and the Mattermost server. 

> For example we recommend you:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example we recommend you:

```

----

###################################
Mobile Deployment via Custom Builds
###################################

Choosing this model means you’ve decided not to use the mobile applications Mattermost has made available via the public app stores. 

This also means you will need to maintain these applications. Maintenance includes rebuilding and incorporating feature and/or security updates. Otherwise, your applications will not match the functionality of our publicly available applications, and could be incompatible with future versions of the Mattermost server.

Finally, this choice also means you cannot use the hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (HPNS).

A great first step for this deployment model involves `reviewing the documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/>`_. Your development team should run through the requirements for building the applications. This will help understand the overall impact when choosing this option. This documentation provides guidance on building, compiling, and signing. It also includes information for customizing the apps.

We’ve provided some recommended sections below.

> - Developer Setup

Reviewer 5: These could have links 0/5

Author: has links in the dedicated sections directly below, should be enough i hope ;)

- Build Your Own App
- Push Notifications

*********************************
Distribution Through an App Store
*********************************

Once you have built your own apps you will need to distribute them. There are two options:

Option 1 - Enterprise App Store via EMM Provider (most common and recommended): 

- This is the most common way for customers to distribute their apps

> - Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", user can download

Reviewer 5: May be an incomplete sentence.

Option 2 - Apple App Store & Google Play (less common):

- To submit an app to the official app stores, you need to submit the app to Apple/Google for review

> - This is the same process Mattermost uses make the apps available for everyone.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- This is the same process Mattermost uses make the apps available for everyone
```

Finally, this choice also means you cannot use the hosted version of the Mattermost Push Notification Service (HPNS).

A great first step for this deployment model involves `reviewing the documentation <https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/mobile/>`_. Your development team should run through the requirements for building the applications. This will help understand the overall impact when choosing this option. This documentation provides guidance on building, compiling, and signing. It also includes information for customizing the apps.

We’ve provided some recommended sections below.

- Developer Setup
- Build Your Own App
- Push Notifications

*********************************
Distribution Through an App Store
*********************************

Once you have built your own apps you will need to distribute them. There are two options:

Option 1 - Enterprise App Store via EMM Provider (most common and recommended): 

- This is the most common way for customers to distribute their apps

> - Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", users can download from the EMM catalog, or you can use the EMM provider to push the application to the user's device.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Once added to your own "Enterprise App Store", users can download from the EMM catalog, or you can use the EMM provider to push the application to the user's device
```
